Okay, the tape recorder is now on.
Okay.
I became interested in medical history, oh, close to, really close to 30 years ago.
And I began buying books that would help me as secondary sources.
Well, I ended up buying books that helped me as primary sources.
Basically, my only criterion for buying a book is do I want to read it?
I'm not someone who feels he wants to own it necessarily because I've got the wonderful Yale Medical Library and I can hold in my hand a 1628 edition of Harvey's De Motu Cordes anytime I want to, but my purpose in buying is to learn about medical history.
at the big buying phase for a very long time and we have had to our house is like a yeast it's butted out because we've had to build other parts in order to hold the books and the stuff that go along with it but unlike you my wife isn't a collector and so we have these interesting conversations about books and every once in a while she puts me on a moratorium so i can't buy any
It happens, though.
And I wouldn't say my wife is a collector, but she does share the passion for the books.
And we'll see something, and we know it's extravagant, and there's no way we can justify buying it.
But it will be beautiful, and it will be something that we both want.
Let me just say that...
What person I did interview at length and visited him was Dr. Haskell Norman out in San Francisco.
Do you know him?
Oh, I know him.
His son is a friend of mine.
Jeremy.
Yeah, well, we interviewed him at length, and he began getting books the same way that you did, things that he thought could help him with his work.
And then, of course, it goes beyond.
Then you have to have the, you know, the primary documents and the great books.
He's got an absolutely extraordinary collection.
Well, you know about this thing he did with the Grolier Society last year.
He had a man named Bill Helfand, who was a former vice president of Mark Sharp and Dome, collects in pharmacology and pharmacy, set up an exhibit for the Grolier Society of the hundred most important books.
historic medical books and that uh you know obviously haskell norman was the perfect person to do that kind of yeah looking at his catalog right here of the of that exhibition oh you have it yeah that was wonderful anyway let's talk about this this marvelous book i have to say it's a and i i have your first book here too or your earlier book doctors the biography of medicine
And I was going to bring them both along today and have you describe them all.
Well, we'll do it.
By the way, let me also say that Yale plays a very prominent part of my book.
Betsy Shirley, four-timer, is in my book.
You know, I've spent quite a bit of time at Yale.
I love the Beinecke, I have to say.
It's just...
A magnificent place.
House built with green stamps.
That's absolutely correct.
In fact, my wife and I went to visit Betsy Beinecke Shirley out in New Jersey, whose great collection of children's books is now on its way to Yale.
she started collecting in midlife to compete with her husband who was making Kentucky rifles.
Anyway, let's talk about the decision to do this book.
Clearly the book speaks for itself, and there's no reason to have to ask you to repeat some of the things that you say quite eloquently in the book.
But tell me about the conviction that such an approach was necessary.
Well, Nick, you're going to understand what I'm about to say better than anybody.
I was having office hours one day in September of 19.
It was late in the day, and I had a couple of long cases in the morning, and I was very tired and seeing about my umpteen patient.
It must have been about 5 or 5.30, and the phone rang, and a man on the other end said, My name is Glenn Hartley, and you have no name, but I have an idea for a book, and I've been speaking to editors in New York, and your name has been given to me as someone
who should write this book.
And that was because of doctors and that article I had done in the New Yorker on heart transplantation.
And he told me, uh, what he really wanted, which was a description of clinical aspects of death made so that the good general reader would understand it.
And I said, Ms.
Tarley, I can't do that.
I'm working on a book on disease right now.
And I had gotten through the first chapter and I have an agent anyway.
And, uh,
I just don't want to do this.
He said, well, think about it.
Take my number.
I went home, and as I was driving home, and it's only 10 minutes, you know how small New Haven is, I thought, my God, who better to write this book?
My mother died when I was a week after my 11th birthday.
I was brought up by an aunt and a grandmother, and by the time I was in my mid-20s, they had both died.
I have had more personal experience with death
than virtually anyone I know.
And here I was in a career where so many of my patients had malignant and lethal diseases.
And I realized as I looked back on the volunteer things I had done, what had I done?
I had volunteered my time with hospice.
I'd actually had one year been vice president of hospice.
For about a dozen years, I had been on the medical board of a charitable home for the aged in New Haven.
I'd been chairman of their medical committee for a couple of years.
Other voluntary things I had done during my career always had to do with things at the end of life.
And I quite recognized, and had recognized for some long time, that my fascination with medicine,
whether subconscious or otherwise, had to do with my need to get some grip on this thing that had taken off members of my family, you know, in essence to control nature.
And you don't have to be much of a psychoanalyst to appreciate what was going on in my head.
So I thought, gee, that guy is right.
I ought to meet him.
So I met him.
And you know what Glenn and Glenn are like.
They fascinated me from the start.
In the first place, they reminded me of my daughter, who's 32, and her husband, the same aggressive intellect, the same certainty of how good they are.
So I signed on to do it, and Glenn said, okay, now write a proposal.
And I was so taken by the subject that that morning I woke up at 3 in the morning and wrote the proposal.
And Glenn looked at it and said, well, that's fine, but you need to tell me about a patient.
And so I added the story of that man, McCarty.
And once I did that, I was hooked.
I realized then that the only way I could do justice to this topic was to describe my own, and I can only call it pilgrimage, with death throughout my life.
And although originally when I told Glenn I would do it, I had made a conscious decision not to talk about personal things, by that time I understood that the only way I could make sense to other people, to give other people a sense of identification with what I had learned, was to get them to allow them to identify with specific people that I knew, whether they were my patients or members of my family,
who had died whose deaths I had witnessed and attended, actually.
So it became a mission.
It really became a mission.
And the book was written almost by free associating.
You know, I would get up every morning.
I usually start working at about 8.15.
Sometimes I read what I wrote the day before, but I usually didn't.
And I would just start writing.
I never had an outline.
I never had a plan.
I never on any given day knew what I was going to write until I sat down.
It was astonishing.
Do you remember those old Ouija boards?
It was like having your fingers on a Ouija board.
And I kept making that analogy all through the writing of the book.
The last three chapters just rolled off the end of the pencil.
I did it.
a 2.5 pencil.
Oh, you did?
Yeah, yeah.
This is not a word-processed book, as we say.
Well, what I do is, the way I do it is I write it, and then when I finish the chapter, I go back and I decide I like another word better than the word I'm using, where I put the clauses front to back in a particular sentence, but that's it.
And then I type it onto the computer, and that's my final revision.
Really?
And that's a minor revision.
And there it is.
It just reads.
It really is such a structured book because you really have covered the major causes.
I mean, you really had a clear thought here that, I mean, I'm going to write something that is going to touch everybody, at least in one place, I guess.
But isn't it amazing to...
I hope it's a little bit as amazing to you as it is to me to realize that this guy who wrote this thing didn't know what he was doing from day to day.
Well, I think you did.
Because you know what?
You've been living this your entire adult life.
Your whole life, really.
I mean, you talk about your grandmother dying when you were 11.
I mean, so your mother, I'm sorry.
And then, of course, you describe your grandmother later.
uh and you you've been alert to this your entire life this book is this book really has been has been building i think through forever i mean for as long as that's that's the point i'm a great believer in the power of the subconscious mind many years ago i lived back to back with a yale professor who backyard to backyard who was a great scholar in a very esoteric area
And I asked him one day what was his secret, because he was one of these people who didn't produce a lot, but when he did, everybody in the field would rush to read it.
He said it's very simple.
He said, I never force the material.
I let the material come to me.
He said he studies everything he can about a topic and then just starts writing about it.
And that's what I would do, you know, when I wanted to write about AIDS, for example, which was not a disease I had treated much of as a surgeon.
I simply went to the director of the AIDS unit and said, I want to go with your team.
And I would make rounds with them.
I would go to conferences with them.
I would read everything I could about AIDS.
And I just didn't even make any attempt to write for weeks and weeks and weeks.
And then one day it occurred to me how I wanted to do it.
And I just sat down and wrote it.
I wrote that chapter in about a week, the first AIDS chapter and the second AIDS chapter.
I went up to visit a friend.
I remember how to tell that story, came back, and then just wrote the chapter.
So it's a combination of a life's percolating plus the material, the new material, the new science material, as in AIDS and Alzheimer's,
which are both things I didn't know a lot about.
The Alzheimer's section, that friend, I mean this proud man.
My wife worked with an Alzheimer's project.
She's a medical social worker.
Worked with a research project being done by Cornell and really focuses on the caregivers, the people who live with this on a day-by-day basis.
And so a lot of this stuff was very familiar.
And just the agony of seeing somebody that
You have the greatest respect for her and the greatest love for her.
And when you describe this poor man totally incontinent and his wife saying, I mean, he would be the most embarrassed person in the world had he known.
And these families, of course, never recover.
They never recover financially.
This family was totally wiped down by the man's name.
Actually, it was Lou Pollock, and Lou had made a lot of money in commercial real estate, and his widow was left with barely enough to subsist on.
I see her.
I spoke to her on the phone a couple of weeks ago.
I see her once or twice a year, and she's getting by okay because they had a condo down in Florida.
But that's about it.
It's terrible, isn't it?
The whole life should be directed towards this.
I mean, it should be focused towards this ultimate indignity, I guess.
You wonder, you know, what can you do about it?
Then you have that heart-wrenching scene about the little girl who's hacked.
Tell me why now bringing that particular... This is not natural death in any way, is it?
But then again, it's a primary cause of death, isn't it?
It's a very common cause of death.
And as you probably know, it's probably one of the leading causes of death in the particular age group, 15 to 24, when the two leading causes of death in the age has sort of moved in.
And in our violent society, especially in big cities, I don't know how things are in Worcester these days.
Terrible.
We have a huge homicide rate.
You know, per capita, New Haven has the second highest homicide rate in the
Well, it scares me.
I'd love to send my daughters to Yale, for instance, but you have to think about it, don't you?
Yale is safe.
Believe me, the city, all of these things occur among a particular group of kids in New Haven, and they don't kill anybody but each other.
My son went to Yale.
He graduated, of course, in 86, but I know a number of Yale undergraduates.
I'm a fellow at one of the Yale colleges.
That is not a consideration.
If your girls want to go and you think it's appropriate for whatever financial reason or whatever, don't think anything about safety.
There have been some pretty bad cases, though, I know, in the last couple.
There have been a couple of cases involving students.
Very, very few.
About two years ago, the Yale Weekly Bulletin decided as a public service it was going to publish every single incident that the Yale police became involved in.
And I read them religiously every week.
There are very, very... Well, that's reassuring, isn't it?
...involving students.
I have a daughter, an older daughter, who goes to Worcester Academy here in Worcester, and it's a wonderful old school.
But, you know, it's in a pocket.
It's up on a hill, and you go outside the walls, and it's two entirely different communities.
And this happens.
I'm the president of the Friends of the Goddard Library at Clark University, which was in a part of the city, which was once, you know, an elegant part of town, and now it's South Main.
You know, I mean, it's surrounded by the...
by the drug cap of central New England.
I mean, there's no way you can insure anything anymore.
But, I mean, being safe, I guess.
Let's see.
You mentioned on page 86, we should be replaced.
I mean, this thirst that people have to live forever, this thirst for immortality and this hope that there will be a controlling of the aging process.
First of all, you don't think that's possible.
And number two, you don't think it's a good idea.
I think it's a very bad idea.
You know, when you're in a profession like I am, where young people are being trained all the time, you watch the development of young men and women who come in at the age of 21 or so, and they don't leave until they're after 30, and you see the evolution of their excitement.
And the things that they begin to contribute that their seniors would never dream of, you recognize the absolute necessity to renew the world with every generation.
That if we were to continue doing things the way we did them into our 60s, our 70s, our 80s, our 90s, our 100s, the world would never change.
Progress would never be made.
And that's the reason that I feel that our deaths are gifts we give to the perpetuation of our species, as a matter of fact, and to human progress.
Just as they were given to us, the deaths of our predecessors were given to us as gifts.
How do you feel then about this research that has the explicit goal of prolonging life, of controlling the aging process?
Well, I like to think of it as research that is investigating the aging process rather than trying to control it.
One of the arguments that I should have made in the book, and actually I didn't think about it until people began discussing it with me as I move around from city to city, is to make clear the difference between what is research and what is applicable at the bedside,
In other words, I am the biggest exponent of basic research imaginable, as I'm sure you must be too.
But the question becomes, how do we apply at the bedside what we learn in the laboratory?
in a time of emphasis, we're living in a time where the public voice is beginning to have something to say in how research is used.
So I say, yes, let's continue every bit of research we can because studying the aging process helps us to study diabetes, helps us to study cancer, helps us to study Alzheimer's, whatever, whatever.
But there has to be increasingly a gap
between what we learn in the laboratory and the way we apply it at the bedside.
Because just as we think about the environment all the time, you know, you can't shoot a lot of chlorine up into the air.
We've got to think of this planet Earth as a single environmental structure that involves not just noxious chemicals that we fling around, but the inhabitants of the Earth as well.
That's a very eloquent answer.
The literature of death and dying, I notice that you bring in... When you tell me that this was almost a stream of consciousness piece of work, I'm amazed because the...
There is so much integrated into the text.
I mean, not only do you draw from your personal experience, but also the literature.
That's why it's a stream of consciousness.
I can't do that unless you're by the stream of consciousness.
You know, you're free associates.
I hesitate to ask you about the book again, obviously, because it does speak for itself.
Who do you envision as your reader, the people who you would like to read this book?
Tell me about the contribution that you hope it makes.
The reader?
What do you hope people come away from the book with, I guess?
I want people to come away from the book with several things.
Perhaps the most important is the recognition
that death is not a medical process.
And let me tell you what I mean by that.
Okay.
I'm privileged, as obviously you are, to have a very intelligent woman that I think would have called my wife.
And through the course of this book, we have had huge, long conversations about the kinds of things I'm writing because at the end of each chapter, she would read it through and we
discuss it.
She made a very interesting point not very long ago.
My four children were born in two platoons.
I had a dreadful first marriage, but I got out of it two spectacular older children who were actually brought up by my second wife to a large extent, so were sort of one family.
The first two kids were born in the 60s.
I
even as a physician, stood outside in the waiting room chewing my nails.
I didn't smoke a cigar except in a figurative sense.
And some guy comes out and says to me, oh, Shep, you know, you've got a boy, or Shep, you've got a girl.
My second two kids were born in the early 80s.
They were delivered by a midwife in a regular bed in a hospital and with an obstetrician close by.
But the midwife delivered those two children with me as part of the team.
Those were the two, and I say this because nothing competes with it, the two most glorious experiences I've ever had in my life.
Why did this happen?
It happened because of the women's movement.
Because women said, pregnancy and delivery, this is not a disease.
Let's do it the way it was meant to be done.
It's part of the natural life cycle.
Well, with death, death has been medicalized.
Going back to 1910 and before, doctors, because prognostication was such an important part of their clinical skill, always knew exactly when to quit.
And at that point, they would step back, and the family then had the privilege of nurturing this person that they had lived with all of their lives until death.
Well, as high-tech medicine gradually took hold in the early part of the century, doctors became much more skilled at fighting the battle, you know, the thrill of rescue, than they were at prognostication, at helping out with providing the good death.
You know, the word euthanasia only means good death, proper death, and it's come to mean something else during the century.
So what I would like to see this book do is to convince patients, families, people, all of us, and convince the medical profession, my colleagues in the medical profession, that they've got to be much more wise about futility.
They've got to be much more wise about the kinds of research protocols they inflict on people that have such a small chance of helping anyone.
And they've got to step back
when the end point of any significant possibility of help is reached, and let the family, whether through a hospice situation or just a regular family situation, nurture that patient until the end of the time that they have.
How do you feel...
about the efforts of this dr kevorkian i mean you mentioned the word euthanasia uh and of course he's become kind of a a strange um player i guess in this drama but uh any comment at all on this well let me just say something about kevorkian you know of all the great things the hippocratic physicians left us i think the greatest is the so-called hippocratic aphorisms you know the
50 and more maxims and mottos or sayings.
The very first maxim, which gets quoted all the time, goes like this.
Art, the art of medicine, is long.
The life of the physician is short.
Opportunity is fleeting.
Experience is delusive.
Judgment is difficult.
You know, we train these young people.
We train them for five, six, seven years after medical school.
What are we teaching them?
We're not teaching them how to take out a gallbladder a better way or do a laparoscopy or titrate miliosmels in a kidney.
We're teaching them judgment.
We're teaching them how to make decisions.
We're not teaching them how to give digitalis but when to give digitalis, that kind of thing.
Well...
You know the New England Journal of Medicine actually has a new feature about clinical judgment.
We write books about clinical judgment.
Along comes a man who went to medical school for four years and never saw a living patient again.
He's never sat in a responsible position at the bedside of a patient who was dying of any disease whatsoever.
He then presumes to think that he knows how to judge people
Number one, when a patient is ready to die, and number two, what a patient means when he says, I want to die.
You know the work of Timothy Quill up there in Rochester at Genesee Hospital.
He's written this marvelous book, Death with Dignity.
I like it so much there's a blurb by me on the back of it.
Quill points out, and he wrote in an article in the JMA in, I think, October and November,
That when a patient says, I want to die, he almost never really means he wants his life to end.
If you sit down with him, as a good clinical physician would or should, and examine what the problem is that brings him to say this, he will very often discover, as you discover, that what is required is something quite different than death.
Pain relief.
One of the most common reasons people ask to die is that the pain is intolerable.
Most clinical physicians treat pain badly.
Most hospitals now, because of that, have a pain service that tends to be run by the anesthesiologists.
Hospice claims they can relieve pain effectively in 93% of cases, and they're probably right.
So some of Quill's patients have been found simply
to be unable to bear pain, which actually can be controlled.
There are psychosocial reasons people say, I want to die.
An aging mother is afraid that if she somehow gets out of the hospital on this trip and dies a month from now in her daughter's home, she will destroy the fabric of her daughter's family.
There are spiritual problems where a patient begins to doubt out of the depression of terminal illness what his life has meant.
And it may be long conversations with a doctor or a minister or a social worker or who knows what.
But it's a fascinating article in which he chooses, I think it's six different reasons that patients say, I want to die.
Kevorkian doesn't understand this.
To me, one of the, and I say amusing in a considered sense, but the phrase so-and-so attempted suicide four times or six times, really the act of suicide should be the easiest thing in the world to do.
I'm agreeing with you.
If the person really was intent upon carrying out the action.
I mean, it's very easy to kill another person, it seems to me.
I mean, it's done every minute of the day, you know.
Why should it be so difficult then to perform the same act in yourself?
I think because what you're saying is they really don't want to do it.
Well, you know, as you're talking, I suddenly remembered something that I hadn't even thought about.
You know, when somebody attempts suicide like this, we always say, well, it's really a cry for help.
That's exactly what it is with Kevorkian's patients.
It's a cry for help, and Kevorkian doesn't know that, doesn't recognize it, and wouldn't know how to give the help in the first place.
I mean, his background really is, he was not a performing, an active physician, is that correct?
Not a clinical physician.
I don't know a single pathologist and plenty of people I know well are pathologists who would presume to make a clinical decision like this.
I think this is more about Kevorkian than anything else.
Of course, he has given a good service.
He has heated up the debate.
He's made people think about things they would not otherwise think about.
And sane people are getting into this, and I think changes will occur.
I think that they're happening all the time in a less melodramatic way, too.
I mean, you point out that pneumonia, for instance, is the friend of the aging person.
I think a lot of, I suspect...
A lot of people are allowed to die of pneumonia that could probably be prolonged heroically.
This is just my guess.
In nursing homes, it happens every day.
It happens every day, and they're allowed to drift gracefully away.
I'm making this assumption, but I suspect...
You also point out that there really is, and you say, death with dignity.
I mean, there really is no such thing, is there?
I think it occurs under unusual circumstances, but I think it's a piece of luck.
What I mean is we have no control except in so far as we can stop smoking cigarettes and lower our cholesterol.
We really have no control over what disease is going to kill us.
You and I sit here, two healthy guys.
And who knows what's going to kill you or me, except for some family predisposition, perhaps.
My argument is that the way you die, the disease that carries you off, the suffering that you go through at the end of life, has nothing whatever to do with how you've lived your life.
And we have this aberrant thinking pattern where we somehow see the entire lives of the people we love through the lens of the way they died.
Now, with Alzheimer's, he can't get out of that because he goes on for so long and you see that degradation for so long.
But why should the fact that my brother died in misery from colon cancer color the magnificent things that he did for me, the kind of family that he put together, the way he brought himself up from being the son of immigrants who couldn't read or write?
This is tough.